# Casco_EJScreen
Using EPA's EJSCREEN to identify vulnerable communities in The Casco Bay Watershed

CBEP, like other National Estuary Programs will receive additional funding to
support our programs via the "Bipartisan Infrastructure Law" signed into law 
last December.

EPA has recently released guidance for applying to receive those funds.  A core 
component of the guidance is that overall, the NEP program should comply with 
the White House's "Justice 40" initiative, which requires that "at least 40% of 
the benefits and investments from BIL funding flow to disadvantaged 
communities."

EPA suggested that we use the National-scale 
[EJSCREEN tools](https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen) to help identify "disadvantaged
communities" in our region. The EPA guidance goes on to suggest we focus on 
five demographic indicators:

*  Percent low-income;  

*  Percent linguistically isolated; 

*  Percent less than high school education;  

*  Percent unemployed; and  

*  Low life expectancy.

We face several challenges using this approach to identifying disadvantaged,
underserved, or vulnerable communities".  The Casco Bay watershed is a largely
rural region, so the range of some of these indicators in our region is quite
small. These may not be the best indicators to use in our region to identify
communities where our programs could benefit local residents the most.

Further, EJSCREEN relies heavily on census Block Groups and Census Tracts.  THe
life expectancy metric, in particular, is only available at the Census Tract
level. Census tracts, in particular, host between 1,200 and 8,000 residents,
with an optimum size of 4,000 people.  The average size of census tracts in the
Casco Bay region is 53.75 square miles. While census tracts provide sufficient
spatial resolution in urban areas to identify pockets of disadvantage, in rural
Maine, they hide significant pockets of poverty within larger, often more
affluent communities.

In this Github Repository, I Calculate some composite Demographic Indexes for
our region, and compare them to national and state-level statistics to evaluate
ways to use EJScreen and related data to inform delivery of our programs.

